# Machine translation

Machine translation is the use of computational techniques to translate text or speech from one language to another, including the contextual, idiomatic, and pragmatic nuances of both languages.
While some language models are capable of generating comprehensible results, machine translation tools remain limited by the complexity of language and emotion, often lacking depth and semantic precision. Its quality is influenced by linguistic, grammatical, tonal, and cultural differences, making it inadequate to replace real translators fully. Effective improvement in translation quality requires understanding of target society's customs and historical context, and human intervention and visual cues remain necessary in simultaneous interpretation. On the other hand, domain-specific customization, such as for technical documentation or official texts, can yield more stable results, and is commonly employed in multilingual websites and professional databases.
Initial approaches were mostly rule-based or statistical in nature. However, these methods have since been superseded by neural machine translation and large language models.

History
Origins
The origins of machine translation can be traced back to the work of Al-Kindi, a ninth-century Arabic cryptographer who developed techniques for systemic language translation, including cryptanalysis, frequency analysis, and probability and statistics, which are used in modern machine translation. The idea of machine translation later appeared in the 17th century. In 1629, René Descartes proposed a universal language, with equivalent ideas in different tongues sharing one symbol.
The idea of using digital computers for translation of natural languages was proposed as early as 1947 by England's A. D. Booth and Warren Weaver at Rockefeller Foundation in the same year. "The memorandum written by Warren Weaver in 1949 is perhaps the single most influential publication in the earliest days of machine translation." Others followed. A demonstration was made in 1954 on the APEXC machine at Birkbeck College (University of London) of a rudimentary translation of English into French. Several papers on the topic were published at the time, and even articles in popular journals (for example an article by Cleave and Zacharov in the September 1955 issue of Wireless World).  A similar application, also pioneered at Birkbeck College at the time, was reading and composing Braille texts by computer.

1950s
Yehoshua Bar-Hillel, began his research at MIT (1951). A Georgetown University MT research team, led by Professor Michael Zarechnak, followed (1951) with a public demonstration of its Georgetown-IBM experiment system in 1954. MT research programs popped up in Japan and Russia (1955), and the first MT conference was held in London (1956).
David G. Hays "wrote about computer-assisted language processing as early as 1957" and "was project leader on computational linguistics
at Rand from 1955 to 1968."

1960–1975
Researchers continued to join the field as the Association for Machine Translation and Computational Linguistics was formed in the U.S. (1962) and the National Academy of Sciences formed the Automatic Language Processing Advisory Committee (ALPAC) to study MT (1964). Real progress was much slower, however, and after the ALPAC report (1966), which found that the ten-year-long research had failed to fulfill expectations, funding was greatly reduced. According to a 1972 report by the Director of Defense Research and Engineering (DDR&E), the feasibility of large-scale MT was reestablished by the success of the Logos MT system in translating military manuals into Vietnamese during that conflict.
The French Textile Institute also used MT to translate abstracts from and into French, English, German and Spanish (1970); Brigham Young University started a project to translate Mormon texts by automated translation (1971).

1975–1980s
SYSTRAN, which "pioneered the field under contracts from the U.S. government" in the 1960s, was used by Xerox to translate technical manuals (1978). Beginning in the late 1980s, as computational power increased and became less expensive, more interest was shown in statistical models for machine translation. MT became more popular after the advent of computers. SYSTRAN's first implementation system was implemented in 1988 by the online service of the French Postal Service called Minitel. Various computer based translation companies were also launched, including Trados (1984), which was the first to develop and market Translation Memory technology (1989), though this is not the same as MT. The first commercial MT system for Russian / English / German-Ukrainian was developed at Kharkov State University (1991).

1990s and early 2000s
By 1998, "for as little as $29.95" one could "buy a program for translating in one direction between English and a major European language of
your choice" to run on a PC.
MT on the web started with SYSTRAN offering free translation of small